---
title: Susa Valley
author: ''
date: '2024-01-04'
slug: susa-valley
categories:
  - Piedmont
tags:
image: 
type: post

---

Ahh another mountain valley. I love them. They are perfect example of how these geographical barriers create special societies, which flourish not just culturally and socially, but also economically. It is always in the mountain valleys where people are still in contact with the gorgeous nature and aim to preserve their heritage. But I forgot one major component: the autonomy. And unfortunately, the Susa valley is forced togather with Torino. And you can feel that a lot.

Let's face some facts. The Susa valley is the largest and most populated valley in Piemonte. As any other valleys at the legs of the Alps, it served as a strategical passage. Apparently, this is where Hannibal must have crossed the Alps with his famous elephants, and this is where Iulius Caeser started his journey to conquer Gaul. So, obviously, the locals had much bargaining power due to the control of the only known route across the Alps.They were smart and made alliance with the Romance which brought them peace for a few centuries, until the Empire started to decline. After the fall, somehow all the tribes noticed that it would be really lovely to control this territory. So in the middle ages the valley changed invadors as frequently as a women change their mood during their period. It was such a popular hotspot that even the Saracens managed to get their. When they had a breathing moment inbetween two invasions, they immediately built the Sacra di San Michele della Chiusa on the top of the mountain, which is now one of the symbols of Piemonte.

What stayed from this past is the Via Francigena, the famous pilgrimage route. Naturally, religion played a huge role in the area, and they were not having shortages of abbeys and hospitals. The sad part is just that the valley was cut into two, the upper part being under the influence of the Dauphiné, while the lower part belonging to the Savoys. The Dauphiné was one of the historical provinces in France, which included the French side of the Alps. But naturally, they could not hold their curiosity back from discovering the other side of the mountain chain. But of course the majority of today's Piemonte was owned by the Savoys, and unfortunately, the two French rulers could not sort things out by inviting each other for a casual baguette, so they were having constant disputes over the territory. This ended only when the Dauphinés died out. It was a consequence of many unfortunate events, including the death of a father adn not long after the first son, which lead to the second son, Umberto II who grew up in Naples partying all day and not knowing anything about ruling. Maybe that is why he was not liked. Regardless, he did some good stuff. FOr instance, after his father's death, his mother decided to be a nun, and Umberto kindly founded a convent for her. What a nice guy! Moreover, he even founded the University of Grenoble and then defeated the Turks in a crusade! But the problem was that meanwhile he got bankrupt. So he turned to the old method using marriage as strategic move: he married Blanche of Savoy as an initiation for cooperation and he even got tons of money for it. However, things were not as smooth as expected In the end, Umberto was even pushed by the French King to give up Dauphiné, which, considering that he had no heirs and did not like the job very much, was not a bad idea. So he gave the province to the French crown and decided to join the Dominican order, because if you can't have a carrier in politics, just go pursue a carrier at the church.

So, as expected, after this, the decline started and the Susa valley was subject to constant conflicts.


## Bardonecchia


This place is really the end of the world. It is a 3000 inhabitant town. It is high up in the mountains, you see everywhere snow covered peaks. On top of that, there is the Fréjus Tunnel, one of the few crossing opportunities in the Alps, which connects Italy to France. Therefore, Milano-Paris frecciarossa train passes by here, and even stops at Bardonecchia! You could ask, why would a high speed train between the two gigantic metropolitan cities in Europe stop at this tiny town in the mountains? Well, there is one thing that is a ideal fun winter activity for rich people who use this service, that justifies this stop. Namely, there is one thing that Bardonecchia is known for: skiing! So, basically all the stores are ski equipment stores and there a lot of reastaurants and cafes which are trying to grab the Alpine vibes, but it's hard because they destroyed all the gorgeous typical alpine houses, with the iconic wooden roofs and balconies. Apparently, back in the days, the owners just bought them as holiday houses and ended up completely neglecting them. Hence, literally the whole town got rebuilt recently. And they were not really keen on the ideal one-family houses. Instead, they built massive blocks, which still preserved some alpine architecture, but overall it seemed just unnatural. This is due to the fact that the town earns its money purely from the skiing tourists, and they wanted to provide as many residences as possible. But clearly,  this business is not profitable enough, because the roads are still full woth cracks. It might be because people use it as a one-day tourist destination. This means, that the train from Torino to Bardonecchia is as full as the trai. To Milano, but here the demographics are different. Usually it is the youth groups, families and old couples who use the train, all already dressed up in skiing set. Why would they bother to pay a hotel there? They are just 1 and half hour away from the ski slopes, so it is easy and quick to integrate it into a one day trip. But of course this means, that except for the sci tickets, they are bot going to contribute much to the economy of the town. They are not going to sit in restaurants and cafés, do some grocery shopping or end the night at the bar. They are also not in need of ski equipments because they can just buy everything cheaper in their home town and bring it with them. So the only hope for Bardonecchia is the be the host of sport events. They managed to advertise themselves pretty well, because they already hosted some categories in the winter Olympics, and the town was full  with posters that in 2025 they are going to be the chosen one again.

## Oulx

Remember Umberto II from the Dauphiné? Oulx was also under his influence, as part of the Delfino Italiano. But as things started slipping through his fingers, certain communes expressed their dissatisfaction more vividly. This went so far, that Briançonnais, Oulx, Casteldelfino, Val Chisone and Queyras, 5 valleys on both the french and italian side of the alps, demanded more autonomy. So, they made Umberto sign the Grande Charte in 1343, which gave them privileged fiscal and political status. Thus, the Republic of the Escartons were born. The name refers in french to the act of cutting the taxes, so it kind of misses the patriotism. In fact, except for Switzerland, these kind of unions were not present in Europe in the middle ages. So the Escartons is definitely a unique phenomenon. It is interesting that theses societies were concentrated in the Alps. There is a great definition, the Alpine paradox, that can give some explanation.

**THE ALPINE PARADOX**
Despite every cliché, Alpine societies have never been closed in on themselves. This is what is stated by the recent work of ethnologists who have discovered populations that are generally more educated than elsewhere, curious about everything and able to adapt (if not evolve) their lifestyle perfectly to a difficult environment. In short, a region closed a priori on itself but instead extremely open to the world. This superior nature of alpine people was supported by by the fact that around this time 9 out of 10 inhabitants knew how to write, read and do math calculations in the Escartons. I mist admit, I don't know the concrete 14th century statistics, but I'm pretty sure this was not the standard. Apparently, the most popular profession was that of the home teacher, so it was really an elite society of academics.

But as the German saying goes " Alles hat ein Ende nur die Wurst hat zwei". The Republic has survived for more than 500 years, but as a result of the Spanish succession war, the Escartons got divided between current Italy and France. The architecture and culture are still similar in the valleys, but it would have been interesting to see a second Switzerland today sandwiched between Italy and France. Regardless, Oulx seemed like a cute town, we had even a nice chitchat with a local cheeseseller on the main street. He used a unique marketing startegy by telling us there is nothing better than eating his cheese after sex. He even gave us a piece to  taste it. Sadly, we left our guy without buying his cheese, because it sucked. We rather went to cafè which made us feel like we are in Canada, it was really special.

## Chiomonte

This village was a dream. Just a 1000 people, with cozy streets, local shops, the beauty of mountains, even a waterfall. A teenytiny main square with decoration made by the school children. What more do you need. Calm, rustic, nature, caring, clearly no crime, high trust, a little glimpse into the innocent beautiful Europe that was taken away from us. The pictures talk for themselves.


## Susa

We visited the capital on foggy and rainy day, which gave a spiritual experience. It was easy to imagine I am on a mystical adventure in the lord of the rings. Besides the weather, the various Roman sights did definetly contribute to that. It was the first time I saw a real Roman arch, and I must say, I get it why people later on tried to also use it as a symbol of conquest and glory. It is pretty admirable. And even if you look through the arch today, you can see a perfect idellic mountain panorama. Was it also like this when Augustus conquered the territory? If yes, they had good style.

They had also some fortresses, towers, churches and amphitheatres lying around dating back to Roman times. it was hard to walk in the town and not accidently bump into an attraction. The city had also great sexual energy, we witnessed some teenagers having really intimate moments on a public bench, and afterwards saw them going to ruins of the amphitheater, probably not with the intent to admire the sight, but rather taking advantage of the fact that nobody is there. The locals at cafè were also in a really good mood despite the bad weather, so it seems like they are having a nice life. I mean if you have any worries you just go for a hike to the mountains or do a causual Roman sight tour. And it is fixed. Based on this I would have expected Susa to thrive more, but it still has in some neglected parts. It does not particularly feel rich, when you compare it to other places with same characteristics. Their voting behavior is also in line with their weirdness. In the past years, they were outliers in the North. Here, most people are naturally centre-right, while in the south the left populist party, the 5star movement is the winner. Their voter base is thus the typical southern Italian who is fed up with that the fact that things dont work and wnats more omney from the goverment. Therefore, it is interesting, that throughout multiple elections the Susa valley showed a collective support for this party. Could it be that they also feel like that their place can be better but they are being held back? Shouldnt they fight rather for their autonomy and separation form Provinincia Torino to be the Piemontese Aosta? There is still a lot of research to be done to fully understand what is exacty is happining to the Susa Valley.







